Why Are Election Polls Always a Dead Heat?
##########################################
:date: 2012-11-05 11:10
:author: scovetta
:category: Uncategorized
:slug: why-are-election-polls-always-a-dead-heat

I've been reading the news recently, and `multiple`_ `sources`_ are
reporting that Obama and Romney are in a dead heat. At face value, this
seems highly unlikely, that the country is so evenly divided between two
seemly diametrically opposed philosophies on the role of government in a
democracy. I would expect numbers around 45-to-55 one way or the other,
but a dead heat? Seems unlikely.

I seem to remember the same thing in 2008 with when Obama was running
against McCain. I wouldn't be surprised if it were the case before that
as well.

I can see two possible reasons for this. First, the political/media
machine is a business, with the goal of profit (dollars, eyeballs,
whatever). Second, the unfortunately-not-dead-yet obsession that most
Americans have with reality television strongly suggests that what keeps
their attention the most is a continuous frenzied orgy of drama. Since
we're probably not ready for a political candidate to have a reality
show (though I hear Kim Kardashian is looking to run for mayor or
something, probably of the E Network), the next best thing is to keep
people engaged by focusing on the "dramatic battle" between two "forces"
of "good and evil", blah blah blah. You get the picture. The poll
results could be skewed, biased, or just made up. I don't know. Just
seems odd.

Of course, there's a better, simpler explanation, one that doesn't
require a large-scale conspiracy.

Each candidate's paramount goal is to win the general election.
Everything else is gravy. Winning means getting 50.0001% of the votes
(ok, not really, but follow along anyway). Now, if a candidate were to
embrace policies or ideologies from the other guy, he might win some of
his votes (e.g. if Romney flipped and became pro-Choice, he might get
some votes that would have otherwise voted for Obama). Of course, he
might lose some votes too. Abortion would probably be a net-negative for
Romney, but let's suppose there's a set of issues that Romney *could*
flip-flop on and net-out with a positive gain in votes. Suppose we start
with the following:

-  Romney: 43%
-  Obama: 47%
-  Undecided/Not Saying: 10%

.. raw:: html

   <div>

Next, let's say that Romney examines all of his issues, and sees that
he'd gain some net votes if he switched on a few issues:

.. raw:: html

   </div>

-  Issue A: 2.5%
-  Issue B: 4%
-  Issue C: 6%

Romney knows that if he just switched his position on Issue C, he'd get
an additional 6% of the votes, and end up with 49% to Obama's 41%. But
what if Romney really believes in Issue C, or is worried that it'd get
him in trouble later on. He'd have 6% of his constituents pissed off
because he "lied" to them. It's in Romney's best interest to minimize
that number, and go with something like Issue A, which would put them in
a dead-even tie. Each candidate would do best to win with 50.0001% of
the votes. This maximizes their standing by their beliefs and minimizes
the amount of pandering to specific groups.

So I don't know- this could all be nonsense, but I can't think of
another reason why polling would show candidates so close to each other.

.. _multiple: http://politicalticker.blogs.cnn.com/2012/11/04/cnn-national-poll-dead-heat-between-obama-and-romney/?hpt=hp_t2
.. _sources: http://thehill.com/blogs/ballot-box/polls/265233-poll-obama-romney-in-dead-heat-at-46-46
